Ideology and Violence: Mapping State Politics and Mass Shootings in 2008 and 2016 
Introduction:
To begin, my research question was to see if there was any correlation between mass shootings and the states’ political ideologies that they occurred in. My train of thought was that there is a conversation about gun laws when mass shootings get covered in the United States more often than not. Furthermore, because gun laws are a political topic on both sides of the party line, I always assumed that mass shootings were more common in states with less restrictive gun laws, being Republican states, than restrictive gun laws in Democratic states. I had other hypotheses, such as the type of guns used in these mass shootings would scale more towards the assault weapons category rather than the standard handgun and that there would be more male shooters than female shooters and, to be more specific, more white male shooters than any other classification. All in all, my main thought was mass shootings would primarily occur in Republican states based on how I interpreted media coverage of the phenomenon. 
I used the shootings.csv dataset from Stanford's Data on Mass Shootings to answer my research question. Out of the fifty variables, there was no variable regarding the state's political ideology during the year of the shooting. My original goal was to see what the relationship was between mass shootings and states' political ideologies in 2016 versus 1966. Sadly, the numbers were too low in 1966, so I subsetted the original shootings.csv dataset to both 2008 and 2016, the first Presidential election wins of President Barack Obama and Donald Trump, respectively, and matched the states that did have mass shootings during that year with their political ideologies and mapped them. In 2008, out of the six states that had a mass shooting, four of them were Republican-leaning states, and the remaining two were Democratic-leaning states. In 2016, out of the twenty states that had a mass shooting, ten of them were Democratic-leaning states, and fourteen of them were Republican-leaning states. These findings are important because while my bias may be correct that mass shootings and Republican states correlate, it appears that my method cannot be the only way to judge mass shootings. 
Background:
	In reiteration, my research question was to see if mass shootings that occurred in states were reflective of states’ political ideologies based on gun control. My bias was that states with strict gun control laws were Democratic states, and those without strict gun control laws were Republican states. “Since support for tighter gun control policies requires an ideological sacrifice on the part of conservatives but not liberals, the effect of trust on gun control support should be conditional on ideology” (Ryan, John Barry, et al.). One of my main thoughts revolving around political ideology in states that held mass shootings was that there would be more Republican states that had mass shootings than Democratic states based on gun control laws. While it would be more challenging to find a correlation between mass shootings and political ideology, it is undeniable that a positive relationship between political ideology and gun control laws exists. That is why I decided to align Republican ideology with less strict gun control laws and Democrat ideology with stricter gun control laws. “gun control has long been a key component of the conservative agenda…Gun ownership is now an important predictor of vote choice, such that gun owners now consistently vote for Republican candidates” (Ryan, John Barry, et al.). While it would be ignorant to state that citizens only vote for Republicans or Democrats based on gun control laws, there is a correlation between how citizens vote based on gun control laws. In order to see if there was a correlation between mass shootings and gun control laws, that is why it made the most sense to base gun control laws on political ideology. 
When I saw the year range of the shootings.csv dataset, I wanted to see if there could be a relationship between the President or President-elect and the mass shootings in that specific year. The search for the cause or causes of mass shootings has been a big part of its media coverage. I intended to compare and contrast different years based on maps: one year for 2008 and another for 2016. “One consequence is that the line is blurred between real acts of violence and mythical appeals to violence as cleansing and restorative, as is evident in Donald Trump’s emotional appeal to his audience’s rage and fear” (Giroux). The President-elect in 2008 was President Obama, and in 2016, the President-elect was President Trump. One added hypothesis I was hoping to get answers for from my data was if there could be any numerical data to give a reason why mass shootings occurred in 2016 and perhaps 2008. Giroux brings both the topics of violence in the nation and President Trump’s ascension to the presidency for his first term as correlative factors. 
Data and Approach:
For my dataset, I used the shootings.csv dataset from the Data from Stanford Mass Shootings of America (MSA). The dataset has 307 rows, which are the number of mass shootings from 1966 to 2016, and 50 columns, which are the variables for the mass shootings such as 'State' (the state that the shooting happened), "Year" (the year that the shooting occurred), 'ShooterSex' (the sex of the shooter). For this project, I had to insert a new column based on political ideology for the states that had mass shootings in 2008 and 2016, respectively. All in all, my most important variables for this project were "State," which the number of states changed by the years, "Year," 2008 and 20016, respectively, and "PoliticalStance," which was separated by Democratic and Republican. In order to solve my hypothesis, I subsetted the original shootings.csv data by 2008 and 2016, respectively. From both new datasets, I then called specific states from the respective years and assigned them as either a "Democratic state" or "Republican state." When it comes to graphing both maps, I then assigned the Democratic states and Republican states a numerical value of '1' and '0', respectively, using an 'ifelse' statement. With the newly created two maps, I then gave the Democratic and Republican states a color based on their numerical value to differentiate between them; red was for Republican states with '0' as a value, while blue was for the Democratic states and '1' as a value. 
Results:
	

As you can see, the results from my calculations are above. Both maps are the political stances of the states that had mass shootings in the individual years of 2008 and 2016. In 2008, out of the six states that had mass shootings, four were Republican states, colored red and given 0 as a numerical value, and two were Democratic states, colored blue and given '1' as a numerical value. In 2016, out of the twenty-four states that had mass shootings, ten were Democratic states, still colored blue and given '1' as a numerical value, and fourteen states were Republican states, still colored red and given 0 as a numerical value. 
Conclusion:
In conclusion, my research question was to find out if mass shootings that occurred in states were reflective of states’ political ideologies due to how politicized gun control is. To recap, my findings from my two selected years of 2008 and 2016 were that for 2008, four states were Republican and two states were Democratic, and for 2016, ten states were Democratic, and fourteen states were Republican. In terms of my research question, the data seems to support my hypothesis that there is a positive correlation between Republican states and states that have had mass shootings due to those numbers being greater than the states with mass shootings and Democratic political ideology. 
Because I associated political ideology with gun control laws, I think these findings are important because there is an apparent argument that the causes of mass shootings stem from states' overall political leaning. However, I can recognize one major limitation of my results: the type of guns used for each mass shooting. Not every mass shooting requires an assault rifle. In addition, due to the close number of Democratic states that have had mass shootings in both 2008 and 2016, my thought process is that Democratic states have stricter gun control laws, and handguns or low-level guns are more often than not under strict scrutiny in blue states. Potentially, with more time or a better understanding of RStudio, I could highlight the type of guns used in each mass shooting in each state on my maps to give more specific details. 
Works Cited
Data from Stanford Mass Shootings of America (MSA)
Henry A. Giroux. “War Culture and the Politics of Intolerable Violence.” Symplokē, vol. 25, no. 
1–2, 2017, pp. 191–218. JSTOR, https://doi.org/10.5250/symploke.25.1-2.0191. Accessed 18 Dec. 2024. 
Ryan, John Barry, et al. “When Trust Matters: The Case of Gun Control.” Political Behavior, vol. 
44, no. 2, June 2022, pp. 725–48. EBSCOhost, https://doi-org.proxy.libraries.rutgers.edu/10.1007/s11109-020-09633-2.
